when we turn the phone to the side to
watch a video or play a game
we seamlessly change the object in frame
a pinhead size chip called an
accelerometer does the job you tilt the
device and the accelerometers functional
part 50 microns across feels that when
sitting still on a table it only reads
the gravitational force of our own
planet 1g move the system and the change
in the electromagnetic field lets the
camera understand the picture position a
micro circuit one fiftieth of an inch
that's tinier than a needles eye a
similar system is installed in one of
the most sophisticated machines we know
your own body your inner ears design is
alike it senses the acceleration when
you move in an elevator or car or change
your head direction that vestibular
system is connected to the eyes try
tilting and rotating your head right now
you can still read the on-screen text
when you're filming a video and the
camera like your smartphone moves and
shakes you see the picture as smooth and
steady due to your inner accelerometer
working but try watching the same video
on a motionless screen Oh everything
gets blurring in some situations like on
a moving ship or airplane signals that
reach your brain from the eyes and the
vestibular system contradict each other
and you know the small brown paper bag
comes in handy accelerometer can also be
used as a vibration meter or seismometer
is probably useless but it's kind of
cool to have the option of measuring
earthquake power with your smartphone it
can also turn your phone into a building
meter not a professional one but good
enough for checking your kitchen stoves
horizontal position your phone has more
astonishing sensors for example a
magnetometer we live on a giant magnet
called Earth so that sensor is used as a
compass some apps even turn your
smartphone into a metal detector using
it I wouldn't use such a tool for
professional needs but it can help you
locate the approximate position of
electrical wire inside the wall
[Music]
the GPS chip in your phone receives the
signals from minimum three but most
often four satellites and calculate your
position using the difference in their
strength the whole surface of the planet
is covered with only 31 satellites your
phone can tell the altitude of the place
you are currently at in most cases your
smartphone combines the GPS satellite
signal with data transmitted from the
nearest GSM tower to enhance the
positioning speed and quality GPS tools
in some applications make your
smartphone buzz on approaching the set
point on the map you will never miss
your bus stop again those can also turn
your smartphone into a car alarm system
if you leave it inside the vehicle
before leaving using the same sensor
your phone can become a speedometer
theoretically it can even work on a
flying airplane need to calculate the
land area square same tool does the job
all you need to do is walk along the
whole perimeter and the app shows the
acres GPS and your device will shut down
automatically if it registers moving
faster than 1,200 miles per hour and
higher than 59 thousand feet ooh let's
try that a proximity sensor on the front
panel of your phone emits infrared light
and senses back the reflection when you
put the phone to your face for talking
it momentarily shuts down the screen to
prolong battery life and switches off
the touchscreen function so you don't
press the screen with your cheek hey you
pay less than $1 a year for electricity
to keep your smartphone fed you probably
heard draining your battery to 0% makes
it serve longer that's not true with
modern devices you only need to
completely exhaust it when the phone
switches off at 20% that may recalibrate
your battery sensors and potentially
make it work better
some premium smartphones have a 3-axis
gyroscope it uses the same force that
makes hands-free cycling easier and
easier as you gain speed a phone uses
its accelerometer compass and gyroscope
all at once and so knows its absolute
orientation some smartphones have
built-in FM radio some don't though all
are capable of receiving the radio
signal the reason is probably that
people don't listen much to radio
outside their cars anymore
we seem to mostly use the internet for
that there are applications for smart
phones that can measure temperature
using the built-in thermometer those
give surprisingly good results but don't
plan your skiing weekend based only on
that data before departure check the
online weather forecast because your
device can be affected by heat sources
and electromagnetic field surrounding it
today almost all smartphones have an
ambient light sensor it automatically
adjusts the screen brightness to the
current light environment but when
you're in bed in the evening with lights
already off and decide to browse the
Internet a little before falling asleep
just don't
turning the screen brightness to a
minimum in complete darkness wouldn't
actually help much it's still a super
bright spot surrounded by a much darker
background the fingerprint scanner that
most smartphones have these days works
on capacitors you can see the
electromagnetic picture of the finger
put to them with the help of different
responses from ridges and valleys on the
skin some smartphone manufacturers tried
ultrasonic fingerprint scanners built
into the screen but those seemed to have
troubles working with protective films
your phone's camera and microphone are
sensors as well and there are hundreds
of apps using those using the camera as
an optical sensor your device can be
turned into a Bluetooth computer mouse
the microphone can be used to measure
the sound level and even use the
smartphone as an axillary F for turning
the sounds around you into graphical
form this function is used by
applications that recognize the mute
second ah who sings that situations
tuning the guitar or any other
instrument is much simpler using your
smartphone as a tuning fork some
advanced smartphones have a barometer
onboard but you need to be online
because it collects local weather data
for a baseline figure on barometric
pressure and let's face it you would
barely use a barometer for weather
forecasting these days we mostly use
online sources for that your smartphone
contains more gold than gold and or does
41 smartphones hold one gram of gold and
you would need about 2,000 pounds of ore
to extract the same amount our phablet
friends even change the size of pockets
in our pants some clothing manufacturers
may the pockets bigger so they could
hold larger devices they stick that in
your pocket pal
walking with your smartphone and not
noticing the reality makes you a
smartphone zombie mom babe and in the
German city of Augsburg additional
traffic lights were installed on the
ground level to be visible to such small
bees touchscreen is an option that we
all love but being so handy sometimes
works backwards as well the Apple
company co-founder Steve Wozniak had
become the first to happily own the 8 8
8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 phone number but then he
started getting over 100 wrong numbers a
day mostly from babies playing around
with touchscreens people with names and
surnames starting with a sometimes face
the same problem thinking that might be
a problem in Canada - a touchscreen
reacts only to contact with skin but not
only humans have skin many pets adore
playing special games on smartphones and
tablets some applications even brag to
be able to translate your pets meowing
and barking into human speech although I
wouldn't completely trust such
translations hey you promised me a
cookie
where's my cookie I came when you called
I want my cookie